Drew edits to pipeline-params.md (#818)
SimpleDataLabsInc/prophecy-docs: docs/analysts/development/pipelines/pipeline-params.md

By default, the pipeline parameter's value will be used for the expression, though this value can be overwritten in both Prophecy gems and Prophecy apps.

> Example: If you create a parameter called `start_date` with a value of _2025-09-01_, you can use it in a Filter gem to include only rows where `order_date` >= `start_date`. When the pipeline runs, it injects the parameter’s value into the filter expression.

## Use parameters in Prophecy Apps

Parameters are useful in both [creating](/analysts/create-business-applications) and [consuming](/analysts/run-apps) Prophecy applications. To use pipeline parameters in a Prophecy app, add an input field and select the pipeline parameter for **Configuration field**.

### Array example

This example uses a dataset with a column called `region`. You can use an **Array** pipeline parameter called `region_list` to filter rows that match one of several regions.

#### Create the Array parameter

1. Open your project and select **Parameters** in the header.
1. Click **+ Add Parameter**.
1. Name the parameter `region_list`.
1. Select the **Type** and choose **Array**.
1. Click **Select expression > Value**.

> 1. Enter `['US-East','US-West','Europe']` and click **Done**.

Author: fixed

1. Click **Save**.

#### Use the Array parameter in a Filter gem

Next, you’ll filter your dataset to only include rows where the `region` column matches a value in `region_list`.

1. Add a **Filter** gem.
1. Remove the default `true` expression.
1. Select **Column > region**.

> 1. Choose the **In ( ∈ )** operator.

Author: OK, yes, thanks for this. Fixed.

| String         | A plain text value, entered via a single-line text input.                             |
| Boolean        | A true or false value, selected from a dropdown.                                      |
| Int            | A 32-bit integer entered in a numeric field.                                          |
| Double         | A 64-bit floating-point number entered in a numeric field.                            |
| Long           | A 64-bit integer entered in a numeric field.                                          |
| Float          | A 32-bit floating-point number entered in a numeric field.                            |
| SQL Expression | A SQL expression, either configured through dropdown menus or entered as custom code. |

</details>

## Use parameters in pipelines

To use pipeline parameters:

1. Add any [gem](/analysts/gems/) that uses expressions, such as a [Filter](/analysts/filter) or [Reformat](/analysts/reformat) gem.
1. Open the gem configuration. Ensure you are in the Visual tab.
1. Select **Configuration Variables** from an Expression dropdown menu.

> You can use Jinja syntax to add pipeline parameters as configuration variables in the Code tab. To do so, use the following syntax: `{{ var('disc_rate') }})`. You can also use Jinja syntax in the Visual tab by using the Custom code expression.

Reviewer: For readers who want to learn more, or maybe have experience with dbt, maybe we can add this reference in a note https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/var

1. Click **Select expression > Value**.
1. Click **False** and click **Done**.
1. Click **Save**.

#### Use the Boolean parameter in an expression

Next, you'll create a Filter gem that uses the `include_archived` pipeline parameter in an expression.

1. Create and open the **Filter** gem.
1. Remove the default `true` expression.
1. Click **Select expression > Column** and select `archived`.
1. In the **Select operator** dropdown, select **equals**.
1. In the **Select expression** dropdown of the Filter condition, select **Configuration variable** and select `include_archived`.
1. Add a Target table gem called `prod_filtered_archived` and connect it to the Filter gem.
1. Click **Save**.

The output of this gem will only include rows where `include_archived` is false. In the steps below, you'll create a Prophecy app that lets users change `include_archived` to true.

#### Create a Prophecy app to show archived data

1. Add a Prophecy app called Reviews.
1. Add a **Title** for the app.
1. Add a **Toggle** that uses `include_archived` as a **Configuration** field, with a label reading `Include archived reviews?`.
1. Open the **Data Integration** dropdown and select **Data Preview**.

> 1. In the **Inspect** tab, chooses `prod_filtered_archived` for **Data table**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the **Inspect** tab, choose `prod_filtered_archived` for **Data table**.
```

1. Select columns to display.

When the app runs, users can toggle `Include archived reviews?` to include archived reviews in results.

### Double example

This example uses a dataset that includes a column called `discount_rate` that applies a discount for customers in certain cases.

> You can use a Double pipeline parameter to create a Prophecy app that lets users adjust this rate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use a Double pipeline parameter inside a Prophecy App that lets users adjust this rate.
```

> First, you'll set up a `discount_rate` parameter, which will be a `Double` value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, you'll set up a `discount_rate` parameter of type `Double`.
```
I don't think that data types are typically used as adjectives

1. Open your project and select **Parameters** in the header.
1. Click **+ Add Parameter**.
1. Name the parameter `discount_rate`.
1. Select the **Type** and choose Double.
1. Click **Select expression > Value**.
1. Enter `.15` and click **Done**.
1. Click **Save**.

#### Use the Double parameter in an expression

Next, you'll create a Reformat gem that uses the `discount_rate` pipeline parameter in an expression that uses Jinja syntax.

1. Add a [Reformat gem](/analysts/reformat).

> 1. Under **Target Column**, add `price`, `product`, and `quantity`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Under **Target Column**, add `price`, `product`, and `quantity`.
```

1. Under **Target Column**, add a new column called `discounted_price`.

> 1. Click **Select expression > Custom code ** and enter `price * (1 - {{ var('discout_rate') }})`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Click **Select expression > Custom code** and enter `price * (1 - {{ var('discount_rate') }})`.
```

1. Select the **Type** and choose **Float**.
1. Click **Select expression > Value**.
1. Enter `72.1` and click **Done**.
1. Click **Save**.

#### Use the Float parameter in a Filter gem

Next, you’ll use the `temperature_threshold` parameter to filter your data.

1. Add a **Filter** gem.
1. Remove the default `true` expression.
1. Select **Column > sensor_temp**.
1. Choose the **Greater than ( > )** operator.
1. Click **Select expression > Configuration Variable**.
1. Select `temperature_threshold`.
1. Add a Table gem called `filtered_temperature` and connect it to the Filter gem.
1. Click **Save**.

#### Create a Prophecy app to adjust sensitivity

1. Add a Prophecy app called `temperature_monitor`.
1. Add a title for the app.
1. Select **Interactive > Number Input**.
1. Select `temperature_threshold` for **Configuration field**.
1. Give the field a label, such as **Temperature Threshold**.
1. Open the **Data Integration** dropdown and select **Data Preview**.
1. In the **Inspect** tab, choose `filtered_temperature`.
1. Select columns to display.

When the app runs, users can adjust `temperature_threshold` to make filtering more or less sensitive.

> ## Best Practices

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Best practices
```
I probably should have caught this when I wrote it the first time 😉

  - analyst
---

Pipeline parameters let you define reusable variables that are injected into your pipeline at runtime. Instead of hard-coding values (such as dates or file paths), you can reference parameters.

Pipeline parameters are useful for:

- Customizing values when using [Prophecy Apps](/analysts/business-applications).
- Configuring pipelines for multiple execution environments (such as development or production).
- Keeping values consistent throughout the pipeline.

Once you create pipeline parameters, they are available as _configuration variables_ in [gems](/analysts/gems/) wherever you can select a visual expression.

:::info
Pipeline parameters are scoped to individual pipelines. They cannot be used in a project's other pipelines.
:::

## Add pipeline parameters

To add pipeline parameters:

1. Open **Parameters** in the pipeline header.
1. Click **+ Add Parameter**.

> 1. Enter a name (use `snake_case` for readability). This is the name you use when you call the parameter.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Enter a name. This is the name you use when you call the parameter.
```

1. Choose a data type (such as `array`, `date`, `string`, `int`, or `float`) that matches the parameter's use.

> 1. Enter a value, or use a function or expression that computes the parameter's value.

Reviewer: Can we add some notion that by default, these values are used during interactive execution. However, you can override the default values in certain areas like prophecy app configs and pipeline gem

:::note
When you define parameters, variables will be automatically created in the SQL configuration.
:::

> ## Use parameters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Use parameters in pipelines
```

Just to differentiate between this section and the next

To use pipeline parameters:

1. Add any [gem](/analysts/gems/) that uses expressions, such as a [Filter](/analysts/filter) gem.
1. Select **Configuration Variables** from an Expression dropdown menu.

> The pipeline parameter's value will be used for the expression.

Reviewer: > The pipeline parameter's value will be used for the expression.

This value can be the default value you assigned, or it can be overridden

> Example: If you create a parameter called `start_date` with a value of _2025-09-01_, you can use it in a Filter gem to include only rows where `order_date` >= `start_date`. When the pipeline runs, it injects the parameter’s value into the filter expression.

Reviewer: Random, but I've been putting one-line examples in quote style, like this:

> Example: If you create a parameter called `start_date` with a value of _2025-09-01_, you can use it in a Filter gem to include only rows where `order_date` >= `start_date`. When the pipeline runs, it injects the parameter’s value into the filter expression.

Thoughts?

Author: I don't have a strong opinion on this one way or the other. (I may develop such opinions once I've been swimming in docs long enough ;) ).

> ## Use parameters in Prophecy Apps

Reviewer: I would add two links to this section

- For those who build the app https://docs.prophecy.io/analysts/create-business-applications
- For those who consume the app https://docs.prophecy.io/analysts/run-apps

Once you have included a pipeline parameter in a gem, you can use the parameter as an input field in a Prophecy App. When you run the app, users can enter their own value, which will override the value you set for the pipeline parameter. (The pipeline parameter serves as a default for the value.)

> For example, you might create a Prophecy app that incorporates start dates and end dates for a weekly (or monthly) sales snapshot. After creating `start_date` and `end_date` pipeline parameters with values of _09/01/2025_ and _09/07/2025_, add `start_date` and `end_date` as input fields in the app. When the app runs, users enter their own dates and Prophecy returns data filtered for these dates.

Reviewer: instead of input fields, i would say Date field and link https://docs.prophecy.io/analysts/business-application-components#date

include that the original pipeline that the app is built on has a filter gem that includes the pipeline parameter that you reference in the app date component

Author: Yes, good call re: Date field, which nicely sets up the example as specific to one kind of parameter, such that I'll add similar examples for other types.

## Example: Dynamic target location

When configuring a Target gem, you define the location where a new table will be written. Often, this location varies, depending on whether the pipeline runs in a development or production environment. You can handle this use case by adding a pipeline parameter and using it in the Target gem.

To do so:

1. Create a pipeline parameter called `target_location`.
1. Provide a default value that points to the file system or table path in the execution environment: `/dev/data/target_folder/`.
1. Create a [Prophecy App](/analysts/business-applications) that includes the parameter as a field.

> 1. Assign the parameter in the Prophecy App a default value that points to the production folder in your file system: `/prod/data/target_folder/`.

Reviewer: Looks like I didn't mention in the doc originally that default values in prophecy apps override the default values in pipelines

> 1. Schedule the app to run in your production environment on a regular schedule.

Reviewer: Link to how to schedule an app https://docs.prophecy.io/analysts/run-apps#schedules

This ensures that when a scheduled pipeline runs in production, it uses the correct target location.

## Best Practices

To make the most out of pipeline parameters, we suggest you:

- Use meaningful parameter names that indicate their purpose.
- Validate inputs to prevent unexpected errors during execution.
- Keep sensitive values (such as API keys) in [secrets](/administration/secrets/secrets.md) rather than passing them as plain parameters.

> - Group related values into arrays or JSON objects rather than creating many single-use parameters.

Reviewer: > - Group related values into arrays or JSON objects rather than creating many single-use parameters.

Curious about this point. Do you mean use array type parameters instead? How do JSON objects come into play?
